Round I of onboarding improvements - for 0.8.4 (#847)
great-expectations/great_expectations: docs/tutorials/validate_data.rst

.. _tutorial_validate_data:

Validate Data
==============

Expectations describe data assets. Data assets are composed of batches. Validation checks expectations against a batch of data.

Validation = checking if a batch of data from a data asset X conforms to all expectations in expectation suite Y. Expectation suite Y is a collection of expectations that you created that specify what a valid batch of data asset X should look like.

To run validation you need a **batch** of data. To get a **batch** of data you need:

* to specify which **data asset** the batch is from
* to specify an **expectation suite** to validate against

> This tutorial will explain each of these objects, show how to obtain them, execute validation and view its result.

Reviewer: Wow. <3

Author: @jcampbell - agree - this is @Aylr 's suggestion from yesterday!

Video
------

If you prefer videos to written tutorials, `James <https://github.com/jcampbell>`_ (one of the original core contributors) walks you through this turorial in a `video on YouTube <https://greatexpectations.io/videos/getting_started/integrate_expectations>`_.

0. Open Jupyter Notebook
------------------------

This tutorial assumes that:

* you ran ``great_expectations init`` and went through the steps covered in the previous tutorial: :ref:`tutorial_init`.
* your current directory is the root of the project where you ran ``great_expectations init``

> The dataset is a folder with CSV files containing National Provider Identifier (NPI) data that are processed with pandas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dataset used in this tutorial is a folder with CSV files containing National Provider Identifier (NPI) data that are processed with pandas.
```

You can either follow the tutorial with the dataset that it uses or you can execute the same steps on your project with your own data.

If you get stuck, find a bug or want to ask a question, go to `our Slack <https://greatexpectations.io/slack>`_ - this is the best way to get help from the contributors and other users.

> Validation is typically invoked inside the code of a data pipeline (e.g., an Airflow operator). This tutorial uses a Jupyter notebook as a validation playground.

Reviewer: <3

> The ``great_expectations init`` command created ``great_expectations/notebooks/`` folder in your project. The folder contains example notebooks for pandas, Spark and SQL datasources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``great_expectations init`` command created a ``great_expectations/notebooks/`` folder in your project. The folder contains example notebooks for pandas, Spark and SQL datasources.
```

If you are following this tutorial using the NPI dataset, open the pandas notebook. If you are working with your dataset, see the instructions for your datasource:

.. content-tabs::

    .. tab-container:: tab0
        :title: pandas

        .. code-block:: bash

            jupyter notebook great_expectations/notebooks/pandas/validation_playground.ipynb

    .. tab-container:: tab1
        :title: pyspark

        .. code-block:: bash

            jupyter notebook great_expectations/notebooks/spark/validation_playground.ipynb

    .. tab-container:: tab2
        :title: SQLAlchemy

        .. code-block:: bash

            jupyter notebook great_expectations/notebooks/sql/validation_playground.ipynb

1. Get a DataContext Object
---------------------------

A DataContext represents a Great Expectations project. It organizes datasources, notification settings, data documentation sites, and storage and access for expectation suites and validation results.
The DataContext is configured via a yml file stored in a directory called great_expectations;
the configuration file as well as managed expectation suites should be stored in version control.

> Instantiating a DataContext loads our project configuration and all its resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instantiating a DataContext loads your project configuration and all its resources.
```

::

    context = ge.data_context.DataContext()

> To read more about DataContext, see: :ref:`data_context`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To read more about DataContexts, see: :ref:`data_context`
```

2. List Data Assets
-------------------

A Data Asset is data you can describe with expectations.

.. content-tabs::

    .. tab-container:: tab0
        :title: pandas

>         A Pandas datasource generates data assets from Pandas DataFrames or CSV files. In this example the pipeline processes NPI data that it reads from CSV files in ``npidata`` directory into Pandas DataFrames. This is the data you want to describe and specify with expectations. That directory and its files are a data asset, named "NPI data" (based on the directory name).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        A Pandas datasource generates data assets from Pandas DataFrames or CSV files. In this example the pipeline processes NPI data that it reads from CSV files in the ``npidata`` directory into Pandas DataFrames. This is the data you want to describe with expectations. That directory and its files form a data asset, named "npidata" (based on the directory name).
```

    .. tab-container:: tab1
        :title: pyspark

>         A Spark datasource generates data assets from Spark DataFrames or CSV files. In this example the pipeline processes NPI data that it reads from CSV files in ``npidata`` directory into Pandas DataFrames. This is the data you want to describe and specify with expectations. If the example read the data into Spark DataFrames, we would think of this data asset as "data from the npidata directory that we read into Spark DataFrames" and give it a name "NPI data".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        A Spark datasource generates data assets from Spark DataFrames or CSV files. The data loaded into a data asset is the data you want to describe and specify with expectations. If this example read CSV files in a directory called ``npidata`` into a Spark DataFrame, the resulting data asset would be called "npidata" based on the directory name.
```

        * If the data resided in a table (or view) in a database, it would be accessible as a data asset with the name of that table (or view).
        * If the data did not reside in one table ``npidata`` and, instead, the example pipeline ran an SQL query that fetched the data (probably from multiple tables), the result set of that query would be accessible as a data asset. The name of this data asset would be up to us (e.g., "npidata" or "npidata_query").

Great Expectations' ``jupyter_ux`` module has a convenience method that lists all data assets and expectation suites known to a Data Context:

.. code-block:: python

    great_expectations.jupyter_ux.list_available_data_asset_names(context)

Here is the output of this method when executed in our example project:

.. image:: ../images/list_data_assets.png
    :width: 600px

``npidata`` is the short name of the data asset. Full names of data assets in a DataContext consist of three parts, for example: ``data__dir/default/npidata``. You don't need to know (yet) how the namespace is managed and the exact meaning of each part. The :ref:`data_context` article describes this in detail.

> 3. Pick a data asset and and expectation suite

Reviewer: Copy the same down from above. (note typo `and and` here)

Author: +1

                .. code-block:: python

                    batch_kwargs = {'table': "YOUR TABLE NAME", "schema": "YOUR SCHEMA"}

                If you would like to validate using a query to construct a temporary table:

                .. code-block:: python

                    batch_kwargs = {'query': 'SELECT YOUR_ROWS FROM YOUR_TABLE'}

        The examples of ``batch_kwargs`` above can also be the outputs of "generators" used by Great Expectations. You can read about the default Generators' behavior and how to implement additional generators in this article: :ref:`batch_generator`.

|
Now you have the contents of one of the files loaded as batch of the data asset ``data__dir/default/npidata``.

5. Set a Run Id
---------------

A ``run_id`` links together validations of different data assets, making it possible to track "runs" of a pipeline and
follow data assets as they are transformed, joined, annotated, enriched, or evaluated. The run id can be any string;
by default, Great Expectations will use an ISO 8601-formatted UTC datetime string.

The default ``run_id`` generated by Great Expectations is built using the following code:

.. code-block:: python

>     run_id = datetime.datetime.utcnow().isoformat().replace(":", "") + "Z"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    run_id = datetime.datetime.utcnow().strftime("%Y%m%dT%H%M%S.%fZ")
```

When you integrate validation in your pipeline, your pipeline runner probably has a run id that can be inserted here to make smoother integration.

6. Validate the batch
---------------------

> Validation evaluates our expectations against the given batch and produces a report that describes observed values and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Validation evaluates your expectations against the given batch and produces a report that describes observed values and
```

any places where expectations are not met. To validate the batch of data call the :meth:`~great_expectations.\
data_asset.data_asset.DataAsset.validate` method on the batch:

.. code-block:: python

  validation_result = batch.validate(run_id=run_id)

> In a data pipeline we may take specific actions based on the the result of the validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a data pipeline you may take specific actions based on the the result of the validation.
```

> A common pattern is to check ``validation_result``'s ``success`` key (``True`` if the batch meets all the expectations in the expectation suite), and stop or issue a warning in the code in case of failure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A common pattern is to check the ``validation_result``'s ``success`` key (``True`` if the batch meets all the expectations in the expectation suite), and stop or issue a warning in the code in case of failure:
```

The ``validation_result`` object has detailed information about every expectation in the suite that was used to validate the batch: whether the batch met the expectation and even more details if it did not. You can read more about the result object's structure here: :ref:`validation_result`.

You can print this object out:

.. code-block:: python

    print(json.dumps(validation_result, indent=4))

Here is what a part of this object looks like:

.. image:: ../images/validation_playground_result_json.png
    :width: 500px

Don't panic! This blob of JSON is meant for machines. :ref:`data_docs` are an compiled HTML view of both expectation suites and validation results that is far more suitable for humans. You will see how easy it is to build them in the next sections.

7. Validation Operators
-----------------------

The ``validate()`` method evaluates one batch of data against one expectation suite and returns a dictionary of validation results. This is sufficient when you explore your data and get to know Great Expectations.

When deploying Great Expectations in a real data pipeline, you will typically discover these additional needs:

> * Validating a group of batches that are logically related (eg Did all my salesforce integrations work last night?).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Validating a group of batches that are logically related (e.g. Did all my salesforce integrations work last night?).
```

> * Validating a batch against several expectation suites (eg Does my nightly clickstream event job have any **critical** failures I need to deal with asap or **warnings** I should investigate later?).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Validating a batch against several expectation suites (e.g. Did my nightly clickstream event job have any **critical** failures I need to deal with asap or **warnings** I should investigate later?).
```

          renderer:
            module_name: great_expectations.render.renderer.slack_renderer
            class_name: SlackRenderer

We will show how to use the two most commonly used actions that are available to this operator:

Save Validation Results
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The DataContext object provides a configurable ``validations_store`` where GE can store validation_result objects for
subsequent evaluation and review. By default, the DataContext stores results in the
``great_expectations/uncommitted/validations`` directory. To specify a different directory or use a remote store such
as ``s3``, edit stores section of the DataContext configuration object:

.. code-block:: bash

    stores:
      validations_store:
        class_name: ValidationsStore
        store_backend:
          class_name: FixedLengthTupleS3Backend
          bucket: my_bucket
          prefix: my_prefix

Validation results will be stored according to the same hierarchical namespace used to refer to data assets elsewhere
in the context, and will have the run_id prepended:
``base_location/run_id/datasource_name/generator_name/generator_asset/expectation_suite_name.json``.

> Removing the result_store section from the configuration object will disable automatically storing validation_result

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Removing the store_validation_result action from the action_list_operator configuration will disable automatically storing validation_result
```
